hey everyone welcome to the drive
podcast I'm your host Peter attia
hey Sid so great to to see you again
it's been a long time since we've seen
each other in person the last time we
sat down for one of these of course it
was in person and we didn't have video
now we've got video but we're you know
in a different time zone
um congratulations on the success of
your most recent book
um for folks listening or viewing give
us a sense of kind of where this book
fits into the prior work we talked a
great length about one of your books the
Emperor of all maladies but there was a
book that followed that and then of
course there's this so maybe put this in
the context of those books
well so um it's an interesting so you
know this is part of a Trilogy and
possibly a quartet that I'm I'm working
on
um
broadly called the life series and the
attempts of these books is to try to
explain and understand how we understand
life and how we're manipulating life uh
living things obviously particularly
humans
um and so in an odd way
um the the place to begin to some extent
the trilogy right now so the first book
The Emperor all Melody is the second the
Gene and now the song of the cell
um would be to probably start with the
gene now the gene being the the the
least unit or the smallest unit of
information
um
uh and then realize as you end the gene
that that genes which are encoded in in
DNA the molecule DNA are lifeless they
don't have any autonomous life a gene is
just a molecule it's a chemical
and it's the it's the cell that brings
it to life and without the cell there
would be nothing all of that code would
be useless I liken this to the the the
human genome
um or any genome to a score of Music
um but a score is lifeless there's no
music in a score it's just uh it's the
code you need a musician to bring it to
life and the cell is that musician and
hence the word hence the title of the
book The Song of the cell
um the cell brings it to life
um so the second book to some extent is
the cell
um and then the third book bizarrely
enough is the first book uh it's sort of
like Star Wars the prequel to the sequel
to the prequel
um where you learn about what happens
when cells become average so that would
be one way to read the book uh read the
series of books start with the gene
um move on to the second unit which is
the cell and finally end up with the
sort of dysfunctional Labyrinth cell and
what happens to it when it's genes genes
go Haywire a completely different way
would be to read them as they appeared
um and the reason behind that is that
they uh progressively
um go downwards I mean the first book
was of course a history of cancer and
cancer therapy they progressively go
downwards and delve deeper and deeper
into mysteries of that history you know
missing pieces what did we not
understand about cancer uh obviously
genes and genetics
um what we did we not understand about
um cancer in terms of its cell biology
when the cancer genome Atlas was for
instance completed and what do we
understand now
um so
um so this they can also be read
chronologically from the first to the
third which you would get a different
kind of story and that's what's
interesting about it you can read it by
the way it's possible that my questions
statement here is um a bit of uh tainted
by a bit of recency bias because I read
them in order and of course I've just
finished reading the cell because you
know we decided on a very last minute
basis we were going to try to do this
podcast last last minute for the way my
podcast Works which is months of
preparation so you know I was sort of
you know reading the book in the period
of the last week and a half
which I enjoyed immensely
but here's the thing I felt more
surprised and in awe of the characters
in this book than the previous books and
that might sound crazy because you'd
think God the you know decoding the
human genome what a Herculean feat but
in many ways the characters of this
story blew my mind even more because of
the time and the era in which they had
to do their science there were fewer
tools at their disposal is that does
that statement surprise you or how does
that resonate with you
well so it it's not surprising
um it's because
um the characters in this book
um are enunciating things that are I
think very fundamental now with if you
if you take for instance a comparison if
you were to do a historical comparison
with the history of genetics so you know
you would start potentially in the in
the scientific word you would start with
Mendel
um and you know Gregor Mendel of course
being the the the Pioneer here and then
there's an enormous period of Silence uh
that follows Mendo almost 40 years in
which basically nothing happens
um and then you know his work is picked
up by other people
um ultimately picked up by folks like
Thomas Morgan and others
um but for a long period of time nothing
happens and nothing's relevant
um here what you see in this book is
very different because you see a sort of
continuation
um of development so once the microscope
is invented in the 17th century
um you see from the 17th century a kind
of gradual blossoming
um of of the science
um ultimately ending up with you know
someone like Rudolph worked out
um who who can make really really
audacious statements that you know are
missing in the history of genetics until
much later
um the audacious statement that workout
makes is every
um every function that we carry out uh
regardless of its origin and regardless
of what that function is is a
consequence of cellular physiology we
ourselves and everything that we do is
cellular is a consequence of something
happening in some cells this
conversation is a consequence of
something happening in some cell so
that's one piece that's statement one
and then you get the other Converse
statement which is equally audacious in
which he says that every
um every illness is
um the consequence of some cell behaving
incorrectly
um and these statements are made in the
late 19th century what sort of mid to
late 19th century then in fact almost
contemporaneous with uh with Mendel so
you have an enormous sets of leaps in
cell biology
um which is why this this book might
feel sort of you know that these
characters are are doing things while
sort of you know genetics is still
plotting its way trying to understand
sort of Mendel's first very important
paper and this a remarkable 40 Years of
Silence whereas in cell biology there
isn't that 40 Years of silence and I
think also just
maybe we take it for granted sometimes
today but
the Ingenuity that was necessary to even
build the tool to permit the
visualization I mean we just lost over
the fact that in the 17th century we're
putting together microscopes but you you
actually describe in some detail what
the process is like to grind the glass
to create the lens to even have the
window into this otherwise microscopic
and invisible to our eye uh piece of
physiology well it's an it's it's an
incredible I tried to make one uh myself
uh I tried to make uh one of Lewin
Hook's uh microscopes um and I can tell
you you know it was not
um an easy cost it was a it was a
disaster
um and he made 500 of them
um these are single lens microscopes and
they're about uh you know this big it's
about the size of I would say a half a
sheet of paper
um and the lens is literally the smaller
than the size of your eyeball
um and so you have this a sense in which
you have an enormous amount of Labor of
Love put into making this thing that's
mounted with tiny screws and tiny little
apertures so that when you look through
your eye through the lens to in a
droplet of water
um you can actually see these you know
microscopic forms so so there's a
there's an enormous sense of wonder
about how people even began to
um to see these and how
um how they found them and and what what
the consequences of that of that finding
were and are
people who listen to my podcast are
probably used to an idea that I talk
about
um and you have come across this now
said because you were kind enough to be
one of the people who read my book but I
talk about this transition from medicine
1.0 to Medicine 2.0 and then of course
where I hope we're going is the
transition from 2.0 to 3.0 and I
typically talk about medicine 1.0 to 2.0
as two big events happened and um they
weren't you know momentary events they
were transitions or processed one was of
course the way we changed about the way
we changed the way we thought right so
it was the Scientific Revolution so once
we introduced the scientific method late
15th century we had a new way of
thinking about observation and
hypothesis and all of a sudden the idea
of bad humors and all that stuff sort of
went away but really the big moment
became germ Theory once we understood
microbial agents and that we had a way
to treat them
we really leapfrogged into the era of
modern medicine and if you look at the
mortality rates as a result of that it's
outstanding I mean there has been no
bigger reduction in human mortality than
the reduction of death that comes from
infectious diseases what I had never
really thought of until I read your book
was that couldn't have happened without
this deep understanding of the cell I
mean it's
it's obvious when I say it that way but
in effect this book describes how
medicine went from effectively
witchcraft into where we are today and
and of course you're gonna we're gonna
talk about this in more detail by the
way but but I mean does that make sense
to you
oh absolutely makes sense to me in the
sense that it makes sense because the
um the the you know the introduction of
of
uh of being able to ultimately see germs
um and connect germ Theory with uh with
human disease
um as you say it took medicine from
witchcraft to the modern era
um you know think of any procedure
childbirth
um uh any surgical procedure anything
that we do and think of the effect of
antibiotics on that procedure and think
of how important it is that that these
antibiotics are now available and and
the life saved I mean just childbirth
Alone
um uh the the capacity of saving lives
to antibiotics has been enormous and has
just really been transformative in terms
of you know again as you say moving
medicine from from Witchcraft and and
and that's because what's astonishing in
in in this in the piece that I write
about microbial uh biology and the
discovery of microbes Peter is that
microbes was were imagined in the
abstract
uh long before they were seen so
um what's interesting is you know people
like Lister the great surgeon who began
to sterilize his instruments
um folks like um you know and I have a
small biography of them in the book uh
folks like Samuel Weiss
um almost ignored by medical history now
but the seminal wise discovered that
that you know the people that that
doctors were transmitting microbes tell
the story you know I have it in my book
you have it in your book I I'm really
glad that more and more people are
writing about him because it always
breaks my heart when someone dies
without their do and some of us is the
example of that and it's it's a
heartbreaking story but it's a
remarkable example of this transition
so Samuel Weiss was a junior
obstetrician in Vienna
um it's important that he was so Junior
and he made a very uh important uh and
Incredibly important Discovery
um so Samuel Weiss was delivering
children and there were two maternity
Awards what one in word twos
um and this is why it's important in
medicine I came to listen to your
patients you know the famous adage in
medicine is the most important question
that you ever ask in medicine when
you're trying to diagnose a patient is
to ask the patient what do you think the
problem is
um and it's the one we forget the most
right doctors never ask that question
but usually the patient will tell you
the problem is they'll say you know I
think I have an infection in my lungs or
you know I think I'm you know
depressed because of X or Y reasons
um because I lost my father so so
IL wise learned to ask people uh of us
of a bizarre aberration that was going
on which is that in world one the the
infant the maternal mortality rates from
childbirth were uh astronomically High
whereas in word two same
Sim similarly same people same women
coming in were much much lower
and he asks a very simple and he knew
this because he the you know at least
The Story Goes whether it's apocryphal
or Not The Story Goes that
um that in world one
um people you know mothers would beg to
to be admitted into into the the safer
World while they would beg not to be
admitted to the where you know they
would have a 30 mortality rate or a 20
mortality rate one out of five women
this is an incredible number if you
think about it
so some of us began to answer ask the
question why and he looked at all sorts
of variables
um he was sort of a classical
epidemiologist so he looked at all sorts
of variables and the variable that he
found was that in in the first word
where there was a high mortality rate in
in childbirth the
um it was run by doctors
and these doctors he figured out were
running between autopsy rooms so doing
autopsies on probably the very patients
that they had killed
um and then running and then without
cleaning their hands
um delivering babies essentially
examining patients delivering babies Etc
were two on the other hand was run by
nurses nurses were not doing autopsies
not touching any decaying or dead
material and there was no mortality so
sample wise made the hypothesis again
remember this is the junior obstetrician
in Vienna made this hypothesis that what
doctors were doing is they were
transferring
some and this is these are his words
some material substance
from the decaying decomposing dead
bodies that they had autopsy into the
bodies of the women that they were
examining internally and thereby
transmitting that material substance and
that material substance
was was the source of the putrefaction
or the infection that these women were
getting and he insisted that the doctors
washed their hands with a diluted sort
of a a diluted version of bleach and he
saw that suddenly now the mortality rate
plummeted
and so he made this argument now
remember he didn't have a microscope he
didn't have this is all in the abstract
but he made this argument that this
material substance was responsible for
this what we what was then called child
red fever or maternal uh infections and
the transfer of the material substance
could be removed by washing hands by
hand washing and so he in the abstract
sense he had basically founded germ
Theory yeah I mean completely prescient
yeah an incredible aggression and the
idea of a material substance that's
what's important about it
um right it wasn't just bad air in a
vague it was on bad air it was not you
know uh bad humors it was not it was a
material substance and of course if you
had if he had the capacity to look down
the microscope he would have found out
that that material substance was in fact
uh nothing else but uh but uh web germs
and the sad thing we you know the the
the the sort of the the epilogue to the
story is the guy dies in an insane
asylum basically having been ridiculed
he's ridiculed he the doctors don't want
to the last thing that the doctors want
to do is to admit that they've been you
know
um uh infecting other women so he's Sam
otherwise is ridiculed and he's sent off
to an insane asylum and ultimately he
dies
um in in impoverished and and never
Vindicated
yeah it's um again medicine is full of
these stories but but yes this is this
is what it was about the book that
really captivated me was this thing that
I've taken for granted so
so much you know of my existence in in
medicine is what really allowed this
this Leapfrog and frankly far more so
than the genetic Revolution I mean we
could sit and talk about has the genetic
Revolution delivered on its promise I
mean in some ways yes in some ways no we
thought of course in whatever it was 22
years ago when the human genome was
coded that was basically going to be an
equal LeapFrog forward it turned out not
to be we'll come back to talk about some
genetic stuff but I want to go back to a
question that you pose in the book that
I had never contemplated and I have not
been able to stop thinking about it and
I love it which is
foreign
what's the evolutionary drive for
multicellular life
so like let's talk through kind of yeah
we go from these single cell organisms
that have all of their own Evolution
built into them and then look at the
complexity that we are today I'd love
you go through this very elegantly
well I mean it's the let's pause for a
second to contemplate single salad
organisms so they are bacteria
you know uh protozoa yeast Etc they're
extraordinarily successful you can't
imagine how successful they are they
live in virtually every environment that
you can think of you know they live in
boiling water they live in thermal vents
they live in inside volcanoes they live
I mean how successful is a single cell
organism so you could the the bizarre
question that you should ask is not why
uh you should ask why we exist at all
why is yes why
what is the reason that you know we we
have about you know several trillion
cells or trillions of cells how did we
why do we exist why not why aren't we
all bacteria
um and people have been trying to answer
the question and the initial idea in the
80s was that there was a massive leak
evolutionary leap
from single-celled organisms to
multicellular organisms
but what's surprising is that if you
look at evolutionary history and if you
look at all the evidence from Evolution
history it turns out that
multicellularity evolved from
single-celled organisms not once but
independently multiple times
and it's it's you know it used to be
called a major transition it actually
turns out to be a minor transition in
other words there was a great
evolutionary drive towards becoming
multicellular and you can ask the
question then well if single cell
organisms are so damn successful why
ever be a multicellular organism the
quick answer is we don't know but all
the evidence suggests that it has to do
with
um several possibilities the leading
possibility is predation so it's much
more higher it's much harder for
um a predator to eat a multicellular
organism for several reasons one of them
is that it's bigger number two is that
it has defense systems number three it
is that it can move away from predators
through specialized apparatus apparati
um so that's one idea the other idea is
is food and resources multicellular
organisms can have you know can act
ACCESS food and resources
and there are other ideas about how
multicellular organisms came to exist
and essentially conquered the world as
we know but that said single-celled
organisms are still the Champions we are
just a minor fixture uh in the world if
you took by weight all the single-celled
organisms in the world and their
diversity uh you would be shocked at how
successful they still are remind us what
ratcliffe's experiments with yeast
demonstrated I I that was I mean I I had
never heard of that experiment before so
it was uh you know I'm reading this like
I'm reading a thriller novel well
William Radcliffe was a professor
um uh who studies this transition this
evolutionary transition from single cell
to multicellular organisms and he did
this actually an extraordinary simple
experiment and he sort of just thought
about thought about it uh over Christmas
uh with travisano his uh his advisor he
said well what if we just take some
yeast
um and culture them and we um we
basically allow them to grow and and so
remember you start single-celled
organisms and we just collect the
sediment so anything that's multi-celled
is obviously going to sink to the bottom
of a flask we collect the sediment and
then we allow that sediment to grow
again in another cycle of evolution so
this is sort of Darwin in a bottle
um so we allow that to evolve another
cycle collect a sediment allow that to
evolve another cycle and buy about 30 or
40 such Cycles he found that the yeast
had evolved and this is astonishing I
have pictures of this in the book into
these sort of snowflake like
multi-fingered
multicellular forms and really a new
organism a multicellular yeast and
what's interesting about them is that
when he let them be by themselves so no
more recollection no more sedimentation
they continue to propagate as
multicellular yeast so in other words a
he had basically created a new life form
um which is multicellular and what is
even more interesting is that when he
looked at these multicellular yeast they
started to acquire specialized functions
so you would imagine that one way that
these multicellular yeast would
reproduce is that one cell could butt
off and create a new multi-fingered
multicellular use that would be one way
that these organisms could be produced
but that's not how they reproduce the
way they reproduce is that a specialized
series of cells that sit in the middle
of this snowflake
commit a purposeful cellular depth
and I repeat the word they commit a
purposeful cellular suicide such that
this the snowflake can break into two
parts two snowflakes and grow out new
fingers
um so this organism has now
evolutionarily speaking learned the word
learned implies that it has some
Consciousness but that's not true true
this is just an evolutionary process it
has created a specialized Furrow in its
Middle where these cells basically can
divide into two forms and what's more is
that he's now practically has done many
versions of this experiment he's done it
with different organisms he's done with
algae he's done with various other
organisms and what he finds is that
there's even more specialization so
these um these new creatures that's the
only thing I can call them
one little channels to deliver nutrients
they form pores they form secondary
structures so he he's really sort of
created a new kind of life and just by
doing nothing I mean just by allowing it
to evolve naturally and remember this is
30 40 Cycles uh which may be you know 60
80 90 days so you can imagine over the
course of you know several billion years
of History the extraordinary amount of
diversity and specialization that could
happen in evolution that leads to people
like you and me having trillions of
cells very committed to doing one thing
or another thing or many other things
you know because my kids who were my my
boys are five and eight at this point
they're as you can probably imagine
obsessed with Dinosaurs so we're
non-stop watching every imaginable thing
I you know I I paleontologists are the
most important people in the world at
this point
I can't help but wonder when I watch
these Recreations of what we assume
dinosaurs to have looked like I mean at
least we know about their size
how did Evolution allow something so
large
to be you know in existence so many
millions of years ago and are we
basically seeing a correction now in
other words was was that just the
pendulum swinging too far towards
multicellular where you know boy you
hear you have things that can really
defend themselves that can really get
away that can really go after prey but
of course they're too sensitive to a
reduction in food or something like that
or is that just totally unrelated and
had it not been for you know volcanic
eruptions and things like that maybe we
just wouldn't be here today and
dinosaurs would be the sentient uh
higher you know
um higher order
creature
a little bit outside my my faith my pay
grade in some ways but
um but you know there's lots of theories
uh I'm certainly not a paleontologist so
there are lots of theories about the the
extinction of dinosaurs
um what we do know is that that that you
know that these life forms were also
very successful in their environments
the problem was as many people have
hypothesized
um that
um that they
they sort of reached a maximal capacity
of size
um and
um smaller mammals
or mammal-like creatures
um were much became much more adapted or
adaptable to the environment but there
are a thousand theories about dinosaur
extinction
um
including uh changes in the atmosphere
it changes you know meteors and various
other volcanoes and events which you
know you can read in in most
paleontology yeah I just I just wonder
if there's something about their size
that became
their downfall Beyond you know the
obvious external factors and it just
made me think of that when I was reading
that segment about yeah
there's a beautiful essay if I remember
correctly by Stephen Gould
um where he talks about a natural
biophysical limitation on size
and that's because the volume to surface
area of any creature uh reaches a place
in uh where the volume to surface area
becomes no longer sustainable because
the the the the surface area of a
Preacher
um does is no longer able to deliver the
oxygen and the nutrients required for
aerobic living yeah um I'd encourage
people to read it um I don't remember
the name of the essay but it will find
it it has to do with the rhinoceros and
what the size limits of creatures uh can
or cannot be interesting
so let's go back to Something in in the
book where you talk about the four types
of cell therapy
um when you spell it out it sort of
makes sense but I'd never considered
this before
um I think it's I think it's I think
it's an illustrative framework for
people to think about the era of
medicine that we live in was so what are
these four areas of cellular therapy you
know I tried to create a typology of
uh the four types of of uh ways in which
we could use cells as medicines
um the first is the simplest one of all
which is to use a drug or a substance to
change the behavior of a cell so the
simplest example would be an antibiotic
you're using a drug to kill a microbial
cell while you're sparing normal human
cells so that's one
the the second one is
um the use of
um the transfer of cells from one body
to another body without any modification
the simplest example of that would be
blood transfusion so you're transferring
red blood cells piglets and other cells
from one body to another body for
therapeutic effect but you're not
essentially changing the cell itself
the third is the use of a cell either
transferred or by itself in a dish in a
bioreactor in a chamber to synthesize
something so I remember I said that that
DNA is inner it's a lifeless molecule if
you put it inside a cell in the right
context the right cell in the right
context the cell will start making
proteins out of DNA
and those proteins could be very useful
so insulin for instance you can only
make insulin in cells
um or you can that's how insulin is
generally made
um so antibodies are made by cells the
you know the antibody perceptin that you
use in breast cancer is made by cells so
that's a third use and the fourth and
the finals is the one that you know is
is coming up and and now becoming more
and more prominent as we as we move into
this new era and that is the use of a
cell where you make a genetic
modification in a cell and then either
transplant it or or use it for a
therapeutic uh reason
um so for instance uh car T cells which
I'm sure we'll talk about are examples
of a genetically modifying T cells and
putting them into a human body
um I've been doing as you very well know
a series of experiments on on bone
marrow transplants in which we
genetically modify the bone marrow uh
using crispr and other techniques and
then transferring them into human bodies
um and and essentially creating a a
genetically engineered cells now people
let's finish up a little bit on that
last Point people often talk about gene
therapy and I always remind them that
gene therapy is really Cell Therapy uh
if you put the gene in the wrong cell in
the wrong place at the wrong time you
get nothing you get the you get the
disaster
um so
gene therapy is really a mechanism to
put a gene inside a cell and that would
be the fourth the typology as it were
and then the book goes through elements
of these four typologies uh examples and
elements of these four typologies as
medicines
well let's touch on a few of them I you
know because you and I don't have the
ability to sit here for the next three
days which is what it would take to do
each of these their their appropriate
service there are a handful that I
really want to to talk about so let's
talk about the story of of Jesse
gelsinger because that is one of the
earliest examples of you know gene
therapy in a human we could talk about
what went wrong but let's let's use it
let's use Jesse's story just as much to
explain the state of the technology at
the time the vectors the vehicles the
methods by which genes were transferred
so
um you know let's just start with kind
of what disease did Jesse have why was
gene therapy viewed as the the um the
solution as opposed to whatever the
other three methods would have offered
Jesse
so Jesse had a genetic disease uh he was
a young kid I think 14 15 years old 16
maybe
um he was a young kid
um and uh you know I've interviewed his
father I interviewed uh I've had a very
very moving interview with his with his
father
um but nonetheless Jesse was a young kid
he um had a a defect in an enzyme uh
which uh is related to the processing of
ammonia
um and uh ammonia-related substances in
in the body
um and so
um
uh the idea back then
um and we're now talking uh uh I think
it's about 22 years ago yes about 2 000
yeah yeah two thousands
um at at the University of Pennsylvania
the idea was that if they could create a
virus uh which would then go to Jesse's
liver
um and start making this the correct
version of the gene
um then the uh then Jesse's disease
would be ameliorated so they created a
virus
um that they thought was going to be
harmless
um it was a variant of an adenovirus and
then they genetically modified that
adenovirus to now include the corrected
version of the gene that Jesse had a
problem with
um and then they Infuse that virus into
Jesse's body hoping that the virus would
go and infect because viruses infect
cells and deliver its cargo the cargo
would be the corrected Gene
um and thereby correct Jesse's disease
um so that was the that was the idea
behind behind that therapy let's explain
two things before we go on with the
story
um we we didn't say this earlier so I
think it's worth clarifying we don't
really consider viruses in the same
category as bacteria yeast fungi why is
that what is it about viruses that
do we consider them living things are
they not living things on their own I
mean they basically just can train
contain DNA and RNA but they're sort of
parasites in it they need us to
replicate so that's right so viruses are
not they don't meet the criteria of of
living things
um they are uh essentially uh uh a
strand of RNA or two strands of RNA or
multiple strands of RNA or DNA uh that
have been packaged usually with an
envelope and with some decorated with
some proteins on top but they themselves
by themselves they can't reproduce they
can't make copies of themselves which is
one of the reasons that they're not
considered living the only way they can
reproduce is they when they go and they
go and attach themselves herbs to cells
let's say to human cells or any other
cells and then they use the reproduction
apparatus the duplication apparatus and
the reproduction apparatus and the
synthetic apparatus that's present in
the cell to make copies of themselves
and once they've made copies of
themselves they butt out of the cell
um and then they go and infect more
cells and make more copies of themselves
and so forth so that's that's what a
virus is and in Jesse gelsinger's case
the idea was that this virus would
essentially infect his cells and create
now but it would insert because the
wires were genetically modified it would
insert the its genetic payload which
consisted of the normal gene into into
Jesse's liver cells the liver cells
would now start making the protein that
was defective in in Jesse's case it was
Gene this is gene therapy and then by
the abide in doing so it would reverse
his his relatively mild but his his
disease
so what what happened then they used
this adenovirus they injected him and it
went pretty bad pretty quick
yeah so um a rather terrible thing
happened and again I have a very very
moving testimony from his father
um which is in the gene a little bit in
this book but but really in the gene a a
terrible thing happened so
um in retrospect we think what happened
is that
um Jesse mounted a very very vigorous
immune response a virus is a foreign
object a foreign body
um and you mount an immune response to
it especially if you for for whatever
reason have been exposed to that virus
before and people now suspect we don't
know for sure that first you know
adenoviruses cause common colds because
they you know in circulation
um there's a suspicion that Jesse had
been exposed to that virus uh the the
the wild form of advice uh before
um perhaps through a common cold or
something like that and his immune
system went music
because it was now recognizing not one
virus particle but millions of particles
suddenly uh into his body his immune
system went berserk and when the immune
system goes berserk like that you
basically have terrible consequences
because your body is recognizing
yourselves as far and the virus is more
and the you know it goes on what I call
a kind of immune Rampage
um and that immune Rampage can kill you
and unfortunately Jesse died from the
consequences of this uh very hyperactive
risk immune response raised against that
virus and and died and in fact the whole
field of gene therapy was frozen for
almost a decade
as we learned to slowly understand the
cause of that death and how we could
prevent it in other people
and so I think in response the field
said look we need to look at slightly
more immune protected or privileged
sites to to dip our toes back in the
water and and so so tell folks a little
bit about what's a safer place to maybe
consider gene therapy as as the field
moves closer to that
well there are many things that have
happened it's not just safe places I'll
give you some examples again I'll try to
create a typology for you
um so one thing you can do is you can uh
there are safe harbors in the body by
say fibers I mean places that the immune
system doesn't usually reach easily
um so it just by chance that retina
turns out to be one of them uh there's
not a lot of immune cell infiltration
into the retina so you have a chance to
use gene therapy and in fact there are
now several Gene therapies that have
been approved
um that allow you to insert
um or inject viruses so that you can get
um some corrected Gene that's missing or
abnormal in in the retina so that's one
place there's some other places in the
body it turns out by coincident the
testes is another place although we've
not used that for gene therapy so that's
one thing you could do the other thing
you can do is you can actually there are
new drugs that can dampen down down or
tack down the immune response so you can
think of the immune response as a dial
what you can do is you can dial the
immune response down so that the immune
response doesn't respond so briskly uh
to the gene therapy you can hide the
virus so you can make a virus such that
your body has not seen such a virus
before so you can actually use a novel
kind of virus that has not been that
won't raise a Brisk immune response
the fourth thing you can do is you can
actually give the gene therapy in small
doses it's called hyperfactionation so
that uh fractionation small fractions so
that the immune system doesn't again go
berserk seeing this massive bolus of a
dose of virus so those are some of the
strategies and they've been very
successful so that now
um you know the the number of deaths
from this hyperactive immune response
still remain
um but they're much much much more
controlled than in than in Jessie
jasmber's times
so you alluded to an example earlier of
of car T cells
um but I think it's you know one of the
great successes of cancer when it comes
to treating uh cd19 or B cell cancers um
let's let's use that as an example to
explain
um how gene therapy can can work in that
regard
well so cartesa is a very special
example of gene therapy so in a car T
Cell uh what happens is that you extract
T cells from a human being who has
cancer
um you extract their normal T cells
and you use gene therapy to weaponize
them so that they can attack cells
including cancer cells so you're
essentially turning the T Cell a T cell
is part of the immune system its job is
to hunt out and kill uh foreign cells
including cells that have been infected
by viruses or foreign cells that have
somehow entered the body that's their
job that's the job of a T Cell it's a
it's a it's a Cell It's a foreign cell
detector built into your body so now you
take that T cell and and weaponize it to
recognize the cancer cells as foreign
and then you re-inject them you grow
them in a Petri dish in the laboratory
and you re-inject them into the body
um and you know our laboratory has done
a lot of this work we are now
um uh doing this in in India
um the the costs of of doing this are
astronomical in the United States
um almost 500 000 to a million dollars
uh per person we're trying to reduce
that cost dramatically 24 perhaps even
50 fold in India using new technologies
Etc we've treated about 11 12 patients
already and we've just released the data
it looks very very very good
um and so they're usually used in blood
cancers like lymphoma leukemia and
myeloma they've not been so successful
in solid tumors for reasons that we
don't fully understand that we're still
trying to understand but that's what a
car T cell is it's a weaponized T cell
that goes and kills cells in your cancer
cells in your body
said what what is the difference why why
is there a 20 to 50 fold reduction in
cost doing this in India as opposed to
the United States because this is of
course one of the jugular issues with
oncology is marginal treatments not that
I'm saying car T cell is marginal it's
actually one of the few beacons of
success but cancer is full of marginal
treatments you know extend median
Survival by two months at a cost of a
hundred thousand dollars how much of
that is just a structural American
problem versus
um sort of uh you know people that are
able to go outside of the existing
channels of IP
uh some of it is a structural American
problem and some of it is not so
um obviously the structural American
problem is that
um for reasons that we're we are trying
to still investigate uh 90 of drugs
including drugs in the cancer space fail
and pharmaceutical companies make the
argument that they are trying to recoup
the r d costs the research and
development costs of those Fair drugs
with the ones that are successful now
that's a complicated and I would say
somewhat specious argument because you
could ask you could say to them well why
do these drugs fail in the first place
is it because drugs always fail is it
because you didn't understand something
about the human body that you uh
therefore took this drug all the way to
spend Millions perhaps even billions of
dollars on the drug
um so that's one reason
um the second reason is so so that would
be the standard argument the second
reason is that car keys are
intrinsically expensive to make
um their success rates are incredible so
these are not just one month two months
survival my book begins with the story
of Emily Whitehead she was seven when
she was treated with cartoon therapy
she's now 17 or 16 applying to college
completely cured so you have a situation
in which these are these are miraculous
drugs
um you you know we've seen people who've
been had terrible leukemia essentially
eradicated leukemia forever
um and become cured the problem is that
they're intrinsically hard to make to
weaponize the T cells you need to make a
virus that virus is expensive to make
it's labor intensive the quality control
that's required is much much greater
than you know making aspirin or making
any other tablet so um and then of
course growing the T cells you have to
grow them in an incredibly sterile
environment
um you know where you have to basically
put on a hazmat suit to go in
um it's called a GMP facility but it's a
highly highly sterile environment it has
to be monitored it has to be checked for
you know that a single bacteria or a
fungal infection in that flask of a T
Cell will now basically take that entire
batch away you you can't give that give
those back so there are some intrinsic
expenses
um now you ask the question why how can
you reduce the cost well we reduce the
cost by several ways one is that we
um basically we've learned to make the
virus much in a much cheaper way
we've reduced the cost of uh you know
the the patent burden
um by essentially I I I think by really
making successful products and not
spending millions of dollars on
unsuccessful products so we don't have
to recoup all that r d cost
um we've changed the machinery
um we've changed the way the cells are
harvested and finally of course hospital
treatment and therapy in India is much
cheaper to start off with
so that you know adding them all
together
um comes to you know almost a 10 40 to
24 reduction in God
so let's now use another example of gene
therapy which is maybe the harder of the
problems which is you have a person more
like Jesse where they have a germline
mutation that results in a pathology
yep and the goal is as an adult
you know let's pick sickle cell anemia
as an example
um in some way sickle cell is so amazing
that one single amino acid difference
can have such catastrophic consequences
on the life of a person
but you want to now just change that I
mean it's a single amino acid it's very
you know we know exactly what genes
drive that how does one go about doing
that and where are we in the
um in the realm of approaching success
there
um so um fantastic new results in sickle
cell anemia
um published in very major journals and
will continue to get published so
ancient disease as you know single amino
acid mutation if you inherit two copies
then you get sickle cell anemia terrible
disease
your blood cells in low offensive
environments form sickles you get you
know they basically clog up it's like
Plumbing clogging up
um and you get essentially what you
might consider sort of micro Strokes all
over your small uh the small blood
vessels in your body terrible pain
um associated with this
um so the answer would be in gene
therapy you know what if we could change
the uh the the mutated Gene so there are
two or three approaches that have been
so far tried one is um using new
technologies uh Gene editing
Technologies to basically change both
copies of the gene to now make them into
normal so take out your bone marrow
which is where blood is made
um change the gene from the abnormal
Gene to the normal sickle normal
hemoglobin Gene
um and then reinfuse that back into the
into the patient so that's a gene
correction strategy
there's another strategy which is very
attractive and and fascinating
um and I'll just briefly mention it so
it turns out that the fetus the human
fetus
um has a special kind of hemoglobin
which is different from adult hemoglobin
and the reason it's different is that
the fetus has to extract oxygen from
Mom's blood and Mom's blood
um when by the time it reaches the fetus
has already been depleted of oxygen
because it's gone through her body
so this is called fetal hemoglobin
um and so
um basically the fetus has a special
form of hemoglobin the oxygen carrier in
blood that can even extract oxygen out
of mom's blood
um and so another approach to sickle
cell anemia is to forget about the
sickle Gene problem and basically in an
adult somehow reactivate
or Express or make a field hemoglobin
um in that case you don't need to
correct the gene the G you leave the
gene as it is you just make fetal
hemoglobin which is very very Avid as an
oxygen uh oxygen delivery machine and
the cells don't sickle anymore because
they don't have this this oxygen problem
and that too has been successful there
have been several trials now showing
that if you activate fetal hemoglobin uh
you can do that so just to summarize
then you can either do gene therapy to
um
Express the corrected version of the
sickling Gene that would be the gene is
called beta Global uh that has been
performed the second approach is to use
Gene editing technology to change the
the gene back to its normal form
the third approach is to reactivate
fetal hemoglobin
um in adults to essentially correct the
the hemoglobin defect and all three are
being all three of them are in trials
and all three have shown various
measures of success my my impression is
that during our lifetime we'll see a
cure a permanent cure for sickle cell
anemia so so this kind of dovetails
nicely into I think a term that most
people have heard of but I think that
the details of this are pretty important
and this is the idea of of crispr now I
haven't had Jennifer Dowden on the
podcast yet I would love to at some
point so we don't need to necessarily go
into the great depths of of crispr but I
think some history is probably relevant
especially as it pertains to the topic
of our discussion which is cells
bacteria and viruses or bacteria as the
cells and how they interact with viruses
a way to protect themselves but I now
want to kind of use the story of crispr
to talk about another tool by which one
can can you know impart this type of
cell therapy so you know the world of
genetics was turned upside down
in a very important way
um by the discoveries of
Jennifer doudna Emmanuel's property
and several others I should mention ten
Zhang and George Church
among others and there's a history of
this which is in the book
um
for a long time
there was the question
of whether the human genome is a library
imagine the human genome as a massive
Library
um if it was printed in
normal text
it would contain 80 000 books
a massive encyclopedia
stretching across a massive Library
and imagine that you wanted to make a
change in one word in that Library you
want to take
book 61 on shelf 47
and make a change from verbal to herbal
uh in that Library
this was a dream of scientists for a
long time and no one could do it
and then Jennifer doudna shot Frontier
and then assisted by Feng Jiang and
other people
figured out that there was a bacterial
system
evolved millions of years ago
that could make that precise change in
one word in that entire Library
um either deleting that word in other
words erasing it simplest change
or potentially changing the word to
another d word
um
that's it's an incredible genetic
Revolution
so
as we move forward into this new
universe
we have the capacity to change the human
genome
in a deliberative and
um
I would say a a processed manner
um so just take the example of sickle
cell anemia that we gave before
we can change that Sickle Cell Anemia
Gene to a normal Gene
by using this technology we can change
the
a mutant or abnormal
cystic fibrosis Gene to a normal Gene
the normal version
or the wild type version
using this technology
so it's obviously extraordinarily
important
um and
there are many many applications of this
technology
and it's exciting because we can do
things that we couldn't do before
involving changing
genes to new genes changing genes to
their wild type variants or their more
common variants
and so forth so
um
we
now have have the capacity to do this we
can do this with embryonic cells we can
do this with embryonic stem cells we can
do this with bone marrow cells we can do
this with T cells car T cells the the
it's a revolution and
all I can emphasize is the depth and
breadth of this revolution because
it's enormous
so two two follow-up questions the first
is
explain using the library analogy how
this system differs from the approach
that was used 20 years ago in the case
of Jesse gelsinger that we described
where an adenovirus was used I mean
what's the difference in scale and
elegance between what you just described
which is in the 80 000 books you can go
to one page one word and make the change
versus that other approach
yes so um so again
imagine the human genome as a massive
Library
80 000 books
um printed on a page
um
and so the old technology
the technology that was used
with guest Jesse gassinger
is the technology in which we
uh by analogy I'm using metaphors and
that and and analogies here we would
insert a new page
into that 80 000 page Library
um so you would go into the library
80 000 books around you
and you would take a page and insert a
new page into that Library
a foreign page
the library the librarian could come
in this case that immune response the T
cell
or the B cell immune response and come
and say wait a second
that's gonna it doesn't belong that's
not a page that belongs
and that's what happened with Jesse
dozinger and other people
the librarian would come and say
librarian being the human body would
come and say wait a second you're
inserting new pages into
a library
that's no good
um and would prevent that and it seems
to me that you didn't even it was much
harder to know where to put that page I
mean if you knew a priority I really
want that P to be between page 87 and 88
you might accidentally insert it
somewhere else right exactly and the
librarian would say well why are you
putting it into you know
Jennifer Egan's book on the Goon Squad
um because it doesn't belong there you
you just inserted that page new page the
new gene into a place where it doesn't
belong
and he or she would say I I don't I
don't buy this I'm not I I'm not going
to let you do that that that that's
absurd
you're reading along with you know
Chekhov or Eagan or whoever and all of a
sudden you find a new page that's been
taped in
the virus that's carried in the new Gene
the new virus
um and you say well wait a second that
that doesn't belong there
and that was where the technology sat
for years and years and years
then
um Jennifer doudna short Frontier and
others discovered a method in which you
would do just quite the opposite you
would go into a page
and say listen I have the right page in
the right
volume of the right book
and I'm going to change one word
the first kind of word that they could
change was just deleting a word
um and this was using a viral
system called crispr
and you could just erase a word
and then more and more research showed
that you could change the word
and as I said you could change the word
verbal to herbal
uh by chaining a single letter and for
the most part leave the library intact
and if you were
a very Vigilant library and you would
say that's okay
you haven't put in an extra page in
you know uh Charles Dickens book you've
actually gone to the right book
and change the right word
in the right space in the right time
from one to another
and that's the subtlety of what crispr
allows us to do it allows us to make
extraordinarily precise changes
in extraordinary precise ways in a
massive Library
which would not be possible otherwise
so you alluded to this at the outset of
your description which was
um
you could make changes to an embryo
right you could take an embryo and you
could make a genetic change which now
has pretty significant consequences
because it is now a germline change
this is different than you know if you
made a change in a non-germline Cell way
down the line
and I guess as things would have it
the first documented example of this
created quite a controversy
um so maybe briefly tell the story of JK
and the the ccr5 Gene and um and why
that and I guess more importantly is
what are the implications of that
um
pretty unethical episode
so um again I would encourage people to
read the book The Song of the cell
um to get all the details about it but
um a Chinese scientist uh Jakey
um made a somewhat bizarre decision
um and I'll talk about why this is it or
was bizarre
um
there is a gene in the human genome
that
um
makes cells resistance to HIV infection
there are many genes but that's this is
one of them
the
the Chinese scientists in this case
uh
decided hey John can decide that he was
going to make a change in human embryos
with Gene editing technology the
technology that I just described
which would make the child of
a parent couple
in which the man was HIV positive the
woman was HIV negative
and imp make that change in the embryo
and implant those altered embryos into
the mom
so that they would be HIV resistant
because of this change
um the problem so sounds great on paper
the problem is that their risk the risk
of these children
to acquire HIV
because they were produced by IVF
is basically zero they don't they cannot
get HIV the sperm doesn't carry HIV
um so if you produce a child by by this
method you basically have a zero risk of
HIV
infection
and so this is what it wasn't medically
necessary right that's it wasn't
medically necessary
um let me take a step back
um
Peter
the book makes a I make a very big
distinction between disease and desire
um
disease is fundamentally linked to
suffering
um when we talk about disease we talk
about human suffering
when we talk about desire we talk about
the capacity the idea or the
aspiration
to ameliorate suffering even when
there's no suffering involved
as far as we can tell
now
in this case there was no disease the
children had no risk of disease they
couldn't have any visceral disease
the desire was
an entirely scientific desire
to create a genetically modified embryo
so
in this case in particular the desire
was that they would create a modified
embryo and that his angry would be the
first in human history to create a human
embryo with genetically on altered stem
cells cells
so uh he went ahead with this project
and he created
to uh girls we don't know their real
names they're
their names have been called they've
been called Lulu and Nana
um and what he obtained
was not exactly what he hoped to obtain
which is not that precise Erasure of
verbal to herbal in a single book in the
entire uh library of 80 000 books what
he obtained was
um a much cruder version of that
um
and scientists
across the world were concerned about
you know did he abstain informed consent
was there appropriate uh use of you know
did the parents even understand the
language that we're using
now remember
because of this was an IVF procedure
the risk of these children getting HIV
was Zero
so again we come to the question of
disease versus desire they had no
disease the only desire was to create
someone who is potentially resistant to
HIV infection
so we have this situation which is very
unusual
where desire
the desire to change human embryos the
desire to push the frontiers of science
overwhelms the disease
where there is no disease
and so the scientific world became
extraordinary incensed
uh about the idea that you know
this scientist had
had really crossed the boundary
between disease and desire now
if this had been some disease that the
children had inherited
cystic fibrosis sickle cell disease
Huntington's disease some terrible thing
that they would encounter in their
lifetime the scientific Community would
have been much more sanguine about it
but these children these two twins that
were born had a zero risk zero risk
of acquiring HIV from their fathers
because the sperm had been watched sperm
don't get infected with HIV so there
they they were basically
um they had they had no risk of the
disease so
what was left was desire the desire to
be first the desire to be create new
human human embryos
and that's what was very incentive you
know that's what incense the scientists
and the community of scientists
you know there's probably no greater
example of the relationship between
science and philosophy
um you know people might want a little
bit of a reminder about what a doctorate
degree is formally called right a doctor
of philosophy and so when you think
about this question
it
it becomes kind of difficult right and I
and I think um in in Walter isaacson's
biography
um of Jennifer doudna I you know I think
this topic is explored in your book this
topic is explored
um where does one draw the line right so
you know Huntington's disease
is a great example in the sense that you
have a genetic you have an acquired
genetic mutation that is a hundred
percent penetrable in a devastating
disease that shortens life and leads to
immense suffering
would we find many philosophers of
science who would say that it is wrong
to alter the embryos of
uh adults who have Huntington's disease
or carry that trait that Gene to prevent
it from going to their offspring which
by the way if you play the thought
experiment out would eliminate
Huntington's disease altogether because
these are germline mutations like how
does how does the scientific and
philosophical Community merge over
questions of that nature and then of
course just to tell you eventually do we
move that further to APO E4 LPA other
thing other other genes that are not as
penetrant
right so ap4 is a risk factor for
Alzheimer's disease
or early Alzheimer's disease just to
give you an example of how devastating
it can be
um for particular people who have
combinations of AP board and other other
genetic mutations that increase their
risk for early Alzheimer's disease but
um
I think the scientific Community would
say
for Huntington's disease the side of the
community would say listen this is a
devastating disease
with a huge pensions
by benefits we mean if you inherit
inherit the gene the chances that you'll
have the disease is very high
sometimes that's not the case right so
you might inherit a mutation in some
Gene whatever it might be but you might
not get the disease bracko one is a good
example you're right you might inherit
one gene but you never may have you may
Escape having breast cancer in your
lifetime
um Huntington's disease is a very high
penetrance so in other words if you
inherit the mutation the likelihood that
you'll have a disease is very high
um I think the biomedical Community
would say that for diseases like
Huntington's disease
it's probably worthwhile
um doing an intervention
of whatever that attraction might be
but the biomedical Community would say
that for in this case in HIV yeah this
was obvious
it's it's it's not work it's not
warranted
and the place oh sorry go ahead
and and I think that that the biomedical
Community would say it's not necessary
it's not part of the it's it's not part
of the Continuum of disease versus
desire it's it it it it it moves towards
desire without moving towards disease
I think the other examples of things on
the clearly desire Spectrum are pretty
obvious right like enhancing
intelligence or physical traits like
strength size Etc of all of these areas
the one I find most interesting is
around Mental Health
right which is we understand
for example autism and schizophrenia
have an enormous genetic component
um
on the surface it might seem like hey
wouldn't it be great if fewer people
were born with Autism and or
schizophrenia but
it's really nowhere near that simple is
it and there's a Pandora's Box upon
which we have no idea what we could lose
as a society if we were to sort of
sterilize quote unquote some of these
conditions
um
you've obviously touched on this and I
want to come back to sort of mental
health because in some ways
where we're going to go next in this
discussion I think is to the last
cellular
uh territory right the the the cells of
the brain to me that's kind of like the
most complicated cells of the body in a
sense
and of course this is one area where
it's very difficult to appreciate a
phenotype under a microscope or in a
scanner
um and so I think part of it has to do
with the complexity of these genes but
but how do you think about
what might be inevitably questions that
Society faces around the use of this
type of precision Gene editing when it
comes to genetic conditions of the of
the brain
well the brain is the most complex of
all organs and
um it's important to understand that
complexity
um
what we know about
diseases like autism and schizophrenia
is that
they are broadly speaking
[Music]
um
two kinds of genes in the entire
Spectrum
of genetics that have to do with mental
diseases
one kind of gene
is what I call a shabji
meaning it pushes you really hard
so think about height
forget about autism for a second think
about height
height is a genetic has a strong genetic
component tall parents tend to produce
tall children
short parents tend to produce shorter
children
so we know there's a general component
to it
now
there are genes in
the spectrum of controlling Heights
that are very powerful shab genes they
shove you
in One Direction or the other
so one example is Marfan syndrome Marfan
syndrome is a genetic disorder a single
Gene one gene if you inherit copies of
that Gene you will likely be
extremely tall and you might have other
medical and other complications but you
will be tall for sure
um there's a story that Abraham Lincoln
may have inherited my fans uh the
marfanji okay so that's a shaft Gene
um those are relatively rare in the
human population of very tall people
the more common
uh variant is what I call uh not genes
nudge versus Sharp
nudge genes move you little by little by
little by little by little
towards increasing Heights
and there may be hundreds they may be
tens of hundreds of genes
that may increase your height little by
little by little by little by little
until you get five feet ten inches five
feet
nine inches five feet 11 inches six feet
etc etc
it's on one gene
but hundreds if not tens of hundreds
now
transfer that same idea to Mental Health
okay
there are certainly genes
in the human genome
that change your neuron physiology the
physiology of your nerves
that are shoved genes in other words if
you inherit them just like Marfan
syndrome you are likely
to get much more likely to have mental
illness
in whatever form it is
uh they're relatively rare
and they are inherited in families
there's a great book
um on this
um
written recently about a family that has
multiple kids with schizophrenia
Etc
[Music]
um
I think it's called Fallen River Road
um correctly okay
but most mental illness
just by analogy with height
is not the consequence of this shove
phenomenon
but our consequences of what I would
call Death By A Thousand Cuts
small nudges that would push you towards
depression schizophrenia autism
Etc and in fact we haven't even found
those genes yet even though we know they
exist in some cases we haven't found
those genes yet
so the
the capacity
to change those genes
is very limited because you know the
examples that I gave you or Jane editing
Gene alteration technology
are limited to one gene two genes three
genes but it's very very hard to find
a way to change those genes hundreds
potentially tens of hundreds of genes in
the mental health Spectrum
so it's not as if we can all of a sudden
wake up one morning and say I'm going to
change your mental health or change the
mental health of your embryo based on
the understanding of our shop genes
because it just won't happen
so let's now dig into this complexity
issue around the brain
um
you know it's uh
I I've tried to explain this to people
and I've never been able to do a great
job of it you do a great job of it in
the book describing
it's a mystery right and you came up
with a way to describe it that I thought
was fantastic which was and I want to
make sure I'm getting this right so
correct me if I'm wrong you said there
were two types of problems in science
there are the i in the sandstorm
problems versus the sand in the eye
problems
and as the cellular biologists and
neurobiologists were getting deeper and
deeper into the brain and it really
seemed like they had figured out this
thing these axons the the movement of
electricity these Action potentials they
were figuring this out
but they had a little piece of sand in
their eye uh what was that piece of sand
and and again feel free to expand on in
this if I haven't if I haven't provided
an eloquent enough setup but it was it
was a beautiful description
um it's um
um it's it's a fanciful description and
it's uh it's an important distinction
um and it's a philosophical instinction
um the i in the sandstorm problem is a
problem in which you
encounter something in medical Sciences
where the information just doesn't fit
um it's it's being in a sense form
and I give the example when we made the
transition in physics between Newtonian
physics
and quantum mechanics and einsteinian
understanding so in other words you
reach the place and all of a sudden
everything didn't fit
the the bending of Lights the presence
of
uh relativity
Etc Nothing fits so you needed a
completely new Theory
uh a new paradigm Adobe shift
in Paradigm paradigmatic thinking
that's the eye in the Sandstone problem
so in other words there's
sandstorms everywhere and you can't make
sense of the real world
um that's one kind of problem and I'm
interested in those problems
this the the sand and the eye problem as
I call it is is a different kind of
problem
the sandstorm in the eye problem is when
everything fits
except one fact
and it's very important to understand
that both of those are really really
interesting because the sand in the eye
problem says that our theory is almost
right
but it's not right because there's
something a fact that won't fit
and the particular example I use is is
neuronal transmission
so so when people discovered neurons in
the brain
they
figured out basically by looks looking
at an anatomy
that neurons in the brain weren't that
there was a space between them
that nerves weren't just wires
if you were an electrician
filling out an electrical
uh situation in an apartment right
you what you wouldn't do is put
spaces between the wires
so that all of a sudden this that space
would become a communication between
wires you just hook the whole apartment
up
but when people like
ramonica Hall and other scientists
figured out how to solve this problem
they understood that all of a sudden
that that nerves
have spaces in between them in fact they
had a name for these spaces it's called
a synap a synapse
and that is an eye in the sand problem
because you say to yourself wait a
second if the nervous system
is just electrical wire is strung
together why would you place a space
between two electrical wires
and the solution to that problem turns
out to be
extraordinarily important for
Neuroscience because
what happens between nerves is that an
electrical conduction
moves between from one end of a nerve to
the other
and then and here's the kicker
it changes from an electrical conduction
to a chemical signal between one nerve
to another
and that chemical signal re-sparks or
Sparks and the an electrical conduction
so you're going chemical electrical
chemical electrical chemical electrical
and you could say what mad person would
ever devise
um or what evolutionary process would
ever devise a system like this
and the answer is the reason is very
important
because what you're what your nervous
system is doing
is in that transmission between
electrical chemical electrical chemical
electrical chemical what your nervous
system is doing is it's putting weights
so that
in the chemical transmission
and in an electrical impulse could come
down a nerve
but let's say there are 10 nerves
or 10 neurons nerve cells that are
impinging on one nerve cell
you could assign a weight as to how much
this one
was transmitting
versus another one
and by assigning those weights by
assigning those calibrations you could
say one is louder than the other one is
softer than the other one inhibits the
other
and it's those combinations of
inhibition loudness
etc etc that allow profound things like
sentience and conversation and
Consciousness and so forth the analogy
that's very important is this is exactly
or similarly to how and I said it's an
analogy this is exactly your similarity
to how neural networks work
there are
there are ways put on how one layer of
communication
communicates with the second layer of
in other words some are louder than
others some are softer than others
imagine discriminating a dog from a cat
you could say that a very loud signal
in that discrimination if the animal
happens to bark
you know that for sure that's not a cat
that's a very loud signal
a very soft signal could be the weight
of the animal
some dogs are lighter than cats
a very loud signal could be the way that
you know the snout of an animal
is fixed with the head of the animal
dogs have a particular snout head
combination cats have a particular
standard combination
so by adjusting the weights of these
combinations we think by analogy that
this is how the brain can discriminate
between dogs and cats
um we don't know this for sure because
this is an area of science that's still
in process
but this is a Classics example in the
1950s of the idea that why on Earth
would you take an electrical signal
convert it to a chemical signal and then
convert it back from The Crucible the
answer is because it was just an
electric boot signal you know we'd be a
box of wires
and a box of wires without the weight
between individual signals between the
wires is a useless box
because we don't understand or we cannot
understand how to construct a Learning
Network
between these a box of wires whereas we
can understand how we can construct a
Learning Network between electrical and
chemical stimulation because we can
modulate the strength of that chemical
simulation such that we can really
actually learn a process does that make
sense it really does I mean another way
that I like to explain it is using music
right which is the electrical signals
that travel down the axon are digital
and maybe because I'm an engineer I do
tend to think in terms of digital versus
analog processes but if you explain that
look digital means it's either
completely on or completely off there is
no modulation and imagine an orchestra
that every instrument could only play at
one maximum decibel level or not at all
you couldn't have any modulation of
sound it would be a very awful sounding
music but if now each of those
instruments can go up and down in
Crescendo and decrescendo and modulate
you now basically have kind of the
analog adjustment of music that's that's
how we make songs and I think right
that's probably a cruder analogy but I
think it kind of also gets at this point
which is
I mean again it comes back to how did
Evolution figure this out how much trial
and error went into producing something
so remarkable so brilliant right I mean
like you again you wouldn't think to
engineer this system necessarily
well I mean I think the the the reason
Evolution figured it out is is again
learning
um
uh a purely electrical system
uh which is sort of like saying you're
playing some music but you don't have
any modulation yeah
um you know you're you're listening to a
score and the score has no modulation
right so you play everything at the same
volume at the same tempo at the same
time
that's on music yeah that's not the song
of the cell
what evolution
figured out and by figured out I don't
want to put a
anthropomorphic idea on it but what our
evolution
converged on
is the idea that music has Tempo it has
space some pieces are software some
pieces are louder
and by altering this loudness softness
as we move along in our neurons
that we can produce not just a
mechanical
um output of the score
but but real music
and and and your musical analysis is
very interesting because that's what
we're producing we're producing not a
mechanical output of the score
we're producing a learned output
a mature output of the score
and that mature output has to do very
much with
you know modulation some parts are
louder some parts are softer some parts
speed up in Rhythm some parts slow down
in rhythm
and that is ultimately the music of the
cell but also the music of the brain
so there's many systems we haven't
spoken about but there's one we would be
remiss not to speak about because it's
near and dear to both of our hearts so
you um
when you went to Oxford to do your PhD
as a Rhodes Scholar
you ended up in a lab where you learned
Immunology which of course would come to
serve you very well as in oncologist and
a hematologist today I want to talk
about a couple of things there first is
you spoke of course of your Mentor Enzo
in the lab
help us understand
what it is that
was sort of bestowed on you
from an education perspective from a
learning perspective as a doctoral
student
that we don't really get in medical
school I mean you you know you would go
on to Harvard Medical School you'd get a
great medical education
but
I think anybody who spent time in a lab
will understand that there's just
certain things that can't be taught in a
classroom
you have to learn things by being in a
lab if that's the language you want to
be able to speak
what are your what are your
Recollections of that that period of
time especially in the beginning when
presumably the learning curve was very
Steep and you're drinking from a fire
hose and you don't know much of what's
going on but you've committed to this
path of becoming a scientist first a
physician second
it's a very different kind of thinking
process
um
uh
I like to make medicines
and when I make medicines I like to make
medicines that are important for for
human life
hopefully for saving lives I've talked
about some of them
um
and we we've spoken prior podcasts about
some of the new medicines that I've been
involved in inventing
um
textbook knowledge in medicine is
important and biology is important
because it lays the groundwork and the
foundations of what we know and what we
understand
but textbook knowledge only gets you so
far
because when you come into the actual
laboratory you understand that
there are things that are predictable
there are things that are not
predictable and then you get into these
eyes I in the sandstorm and sand in the
eye problems
um which are very important
um you you learn to recognize failure
you learn to recognize how to
troubleshoot your way out of failure
um
none of this is in a textbook
open a textbook of biology any textbook
or biochemistry biology
and try to find me a section on
troubleshooting
you won't find one
troubleshooting your way out of failure
is a the most standard way that we think
about medicine and biology
run a clinical trial
how do we select a patient so let's say
you're running a phase one
phase one two B clinical trial I I run I
have six open trials right now
how do you run a clinical trial
read a textbook
nothing will tell you about how you
select a patient for a clinical trial
how you manage a patient with uh
complications from a clinical trial
there is no information anywhere in that
textbook about running that trial
so
similarly run run an experiment which
will
set you up for a clinical trial
there is no information in that textbook
about how to troubleshoot how and where
and how to do that science that allows
you to make it into human medicine
um what if for instance you suddenly
find that
um the medicine that you that you're
working with are you trying to create
um isn't pure
that there's a contamination
um how do you how do you remove that
contamination
there is no method
you can't find a textbook
and so what you do is you ask your peers
who've done this before you
and you say what did you do
and that's not in a textbook
that's not in any book
that's not in the book that's ever been
written
and so I want you to write about that I
wanted to write about that process
of learning by doing learning by being
learning by experiencing
and that's why that whole chapter exists
in the book there is a kind of learning
that we do by doing
that would be by being
that we acquire by acquiring
that is not it cannot be found in any
book or textbook in the medical sciences
and there's no way around it
you know there are a couple of really
personal things I want to I want to ask
you about some of them for selfish
reasons I want to start with writing
um
for all the times we've had meals
together I don't know how this hasn't
occurred to me to ask you but
how and when
did this and I and when I call it a gift
I don't want to undermine it Sid because
I don't want to suggest it doesn't
require an obscene amount of hard work
but the reality of it is if I spent the
rest of my life writing
I would still write like a child
compared to an adult in the way that you
write so at what point in your
high school undergraduate Etc did you
realize that
you had a brilliant way to write and I
and I will say this I think you are
hands down the best medical writer I
mean best writer who happens to write
about anything that has to do with
science and medicine I mean it's really
it's outstanding Sid
well thanks for the compliments uh you
know writing is not an easy process for
me
um but it's also a a somewhat weird
process for me and by weird I mean I
I throw in everything
um in the next book that I write maybe
this conversation that we're having or
some aspect of this conversation some
question that you asked in this
conversation will find its way into the
book
so
um I I I I I have this policy in which I
don't make any
uh that there's nothing that's outside
my box
it's all part of the Box all part of the
whole story
so
um again I I find that that that writing
is a way for me to
think a way for me to
work through my thoughts
um
and the analogies and the metaphors and
the the metaphorical parts of my writing
are really not in service of writing
they're in service of making me think
they're in terms of making me understand
why
a certain phenomenon
is related to another phenomenon
I draw from history I draw from
mythology from Philosophy from our
conversations from interviews
and everything goes into into a book
um
and it's in some ways I feel as if
I had to
invent the genre
because
you know it was so siled medical writing
was about medicine
it wasn't personal
it wasn't
I mean there was
sharp distinctions between memoir
and case histories
there were sharp distinctions between
you know
uh deep history and an interview or
journalistic writing and I said to
myself you know these distinctions are
arbitrary
they are they only exist to serve
a kind of secondary purpose why not
erase all of them and make a new kind of
writing in medicine
or in in life because
the the most important thing that I
think people told me about medical
writing was like was that
when people read writing about medicine
they want to enter your Cosmos you don't
want to enter your world
they want to know what it's like to be
like you
um and so I said okay uh I'll show them
what is it like to be like me well it's
like to be to experience intense
um it absolutely intense exhilaration
when a clinical trial is successful
absolute
depths of depression
and crisis when a clinical trial fails
um absolute anticipation absolute
apprehension
absolute admiration for
people who on Whose shoulders I stand
that's what it's like to be like me
and
and when people said to me show me your
world I said okay I'll show you my word
but I'll show you my word in in a way
that that's like to be like me
what is it like to be like me I I I am
like you I
have terrible days I have very good days
I have exhilarating days
um I make inventions I
those inventions work some of them don't
work
um and all of it is wonderful and
terrible at the same terrifying at the
same time I want to bring you into that
and that means I will combine Memoir
journalistic writing traveling writing
philosophy mythology and everything I'll
throw everything in there so that you
understand what it's like to be like me
there are two things you talked about in
the book Sid that were completely
unconnected but immediately in my mind
we're connected and it probably has to
do with my own world
um as you know said I think a lot about
the end of life I think a lot about how
we can delay and push off the end of
life
and one of the things that I think a lot
about is how quickly life can vanish in
a person when they fall
and an older person I don't mean a 10
year old
and these two things that uh
you write about and again totally
different parts of the book run you you
talk very openly about your own
depression that really kind of kicked in
a year after your father's death which
resulted from a fall
and near the very end of the book you
talk about the end of virtual's life
which I didn't I was not aware of how
virtue died I I was completely unaware
of that that he ultimately died as a
result of a fall and a broken femur and
within less than six months he was dead
which is unfortunately
far more common than people realize I
mean it is the leading cause of
accidental death and the mortality is
you you know said from a person over the
age of 65 if a person at that age or
above falls and breaks their femur
depending on the study it's anywhere
from 10 to 30 percent mortality at 12
months
and you do a very good job of explaining
the why
because a lot of people when confronted
with that fact simply can't understand
it and I was again confronted by it just
two days ago when um the the swim coach
of Stanford while I was there and I of
course I didn't swim at Stanford but but
many of my friends did and I sort of
knew him and I got to know him later
after he had retired
um and he fell
two weeks ago broke his hip and two
weeks later he's dead never really
recovered from the surgery that's a very
extreme example
it's it's it's interesting to me but you
know
um
what I what I couldn't believe was how
you tied it back to this cell right
which was here we have one of these
Giants of cellular biology
who Falls
and dies but it's actually the result of
a cellular process one cell you know it
starts with the the osteoclast and the
osteoblast and the Matrix of the hip and
ultimately it leads to organ failure
um that's not a that's not a leap that I
think is easy to make it's not it's not
obvious
well it's it's it's obvious when you
think about burkhar's own idea that the
body is a citizenship yeah well said
um and the citizenship Falls when one
part of this essential Falls imagine
a citizenship in any in in any capacity
right all of a sudden your Bureau of
Transportation decides to take a leave
for 20 days
the the trains in New York City stopped
running
to the
train stopped running and therefore
people can't go to work
uh people can't go to work and the
economy collapses the economy collapses
and all of a sudden people who are
dependent on
small changes in their lifetimes wage
workers collapse
um and then the the entire system the
net the network of systems collapses all
because you know the Department of
Transportation closed down for two days
um that's what happens in the human body
that's the liability in some ways of
multicellular existence
there are many advantages we talked
about multicellular existence as
advantages but they're also liabilities
because you depend on your pancreas for
insulin
you don't depend on your brain your
brain doesn't make insulin you depend on
your brain for senses and Consciousness
you depend on your muscles for movement
your brain can't produce movement with
our muscles
and so there's a citizenship
that that bodies develop and have
developed with each other so that we
together perform as organisms
say it again another personal question
how much did you weigh the
pros and cons of writing about such
personal matters as your own depression
I mean we we do still live in a world
where
it's not entirely clear to me why we
view depression different from
hypertension
um you know for example if a person says
I have hyperlipidemia and I I take 10
milligrams of Lipitor a day I don't
think anybody bats an eye
but if somebody says I'm really
struggling with depression and I take an
antidepressant
it just has a different valence to it
for some reason I don't again I don't
know why that is I really don't
um but in the in the
in the presence of that knowledge you
still chose to talk about this
[Music]
um
why
well Peter is a very conscious Choice it
was not unconscious I talked to my
family about it
um and I made the choice after that
conversation
um
I agree with you I think that depression
it can be
um what's called an organic disorder a
disordered in mood regulating neurons in
your brain just like type 1 diabetes is
an organic disorder a disorder in the
inability of pancreatic beta cells to
secret insulin
um the reason is different I think is
that we associate
a kind of victimhood
to mental disorders
um
and that kind of victimhood is punitive
it is it it blames victims for being
victims
in a way that you know you don't say
that oh you know you're hypertensive
because you
um
have genetics or behaviors
etc etc that are related to your
hypertension
but depression and mental disorders
grief depression and perhaps even more
complex disorders schizophrenia
have a sense of
blaming the victim and the victim being
the person who's
um
the the experiencing the disorder
that victimhood I think has to do with
the idea the brain is separate from the
rest of the body
it's a special order and yes of course
it's a special organ there's no doubt
about that but on the other hand it's
also an organ that has physiology just
like your pancreases physiology just
like your heart has physiology
and so what I want to get away from
is this idea of special victimhood
um and talk about the brain
as a cellular cluster
which is just a cellular in some ways
just a cellular cluster like the
pancreas or the heart or the liver is
the cellular cluster
and thereby remove this or defend
or even challenge this idea of
victimhood
and and responsibility
because most people who experience
severe political depression
experience it as a consequence of of
course of environmental and emotional
stimulation
the grief of dying the grief of that
situation
Etc
but they but but there are
neuronal or nervous
nerve cells and nerve cell circuits
that push them
in biochemical and chemical ways
towards the state in which they cannot
function
um and I want to highlight that that
absence of function if workout was alive
today workah would say that absence of
function or that dysfunction is not
dissimilar
to a person who has a failing heart
um or a failing liver
because that function is
a dysfunction of mood regulating
circuits and neurons in the brain just
as type 1 diabetes is a dysfunction of
of insulin regulating cells in the
pancreas
and that idea again is actually very
important and I think radical
um in in this book and in all my books
I I agree with you completely I think it
is entirely radical and it's I think
very
difficult you know I I I spoke about
this with Carl deseroth um if you
haven't read his book by the way it's a
fantastic book as well I haven't I've
read this book it's yeah it's incredible
and and Carl was a classmate of mine in
medical school and he was equally
brilliant
um then as as he is now
but but he talks about this idea right
which is it's this entire field of
medicine I'm referring to Psychiatry for
which we have not one biomarker for
which we have not one radiographic
finding that lends itself to a diagnosis
and so in the example of that failing
heart and that failing liver I mean we
have a menu of things to Aid in the
diagnosis in fact it's much easier to
make that diagnosis today than when
William Osler had to make the diagnosis
125 years ago I mean today a medical
student can diagnose a failing heart and
a failing liver
given enough data
and yet there's still this black box
inside of our brains in some ways and um
I I think I just you know I find it very
interesting and I I can't help but
Wonder
where we will be in 20 years like when I
when I think about oncology today and I
think about what the wish for oncology
is in 20 years and I think about
Psychiatry today and psychiatry in 20
years
I feel like there's even more potential
in Psychiatry and of course I think the
potential oncology is enormous
well I I think I think you you've hit
the nail of the head which is to say
that
you know
biomarkers will help and our are always
helpful
But ultimately it's a clinical decision
um
when you see
I always tell people you know
um who haven't been in clinical medicine
when you see depression you know
depression you know that that this
person has a dysfunction of the neural
circuits that regulate mood just like a
patient with type 1 diabetes
has a dysfunction in the neuro in the
cells that secure the insulin
um and even if there are no biomarkers
you know it this is what humans can see
about human other humans
um there's a there is a
disproportionality
or a uh this
um a a disconnection between the level
of grief
that a person experiences
and the level of grief that persists
at the level of honoree the level of
um psychomotor inability to move
um
that a person experiences when they're
when they're clinically depressed
so so I think that that there are even
in the absence of biomarkers
I think there there is a new age that is
coming
um and and a respect I think for the
autonomy of patience
who experience neurological and
psychiatric diseases and I think as
you've said before desert writes about
them
um very carefully and very thoughtfully
there are many people Andrew Solomon has
written about
um about all of this and I think it's
very important because you know we could
find therapies for these some of them
may be related to things that you and I
are very interested in like
alterations in diets alterations in
diets plus medicines alterations in in
human physiology that could reset brain
circuits
electrical stimulation as Helen mayberg
and others have been doing and to treat
the problem as if it was
you know just a problem that is sort of
an active phenomenon
is to minimize what the problem is
Sid there's so much more I um wanted to
talk with you about but as not
surprisingly we we've we've gone pretty
deep in a few things and there are
topics like the entire immune system the
epigenetic phenomenon and how we get
into cellular reprogramming and yamanaka
factors I mean there's we got through
about half of what I wanted to talk
about so I think the only reasonable
thing to do here is to say
once the book tour is behind you once
we've both got a little bit more
breathing room we should sit down again
and do part three where we where we talk
about some of these other factors you
you have a wonderful way of explaining
complicated ideas
um and and frankly I think perhaps the
single most important thing I wanted to
talk about today which was to bring all
of this around
the future of Science and the culture of
anti-science that is that is propagating
I I I I hesitate to not touch on that
now but I don't think we could do it
justice with a glib and short discussion
and I'd I'd I'd I'd with your blessing
like to postpone that as as yet another
topic we can explore uh hopefully in
would love to
um and and good luck I love your
podcasts and I have loved being on it so
well thank you Sid and uh
congratulations again on another
Masterpiece and um I'm looking forward
to uh to to helping to spread the word
so that many more people uh enjoy the uh
or experience the joy of reading your
work thank you Sid
[Music]